[Music]
welcome to question time on tonight's
panel Robert - Buckland the government's
justice secretary formerly Solicitor
General for England and Wales and
prisons Minister joining us down the
line from Cardiff Labour's Health
Minister the Senate previously the
youngest-ever president of the world tu
see Vaughan gething
Liz Savile Roberts elected as an MP in
currently the leader of pride Camry in
the House of Commons rocco forte a hotel
with the business in his blood he worked
with his father at the start of his
career and in 1996 started his own group
of luxury hotels from Scotland to
Shanghai and prolific author professor
of creative writing at Brunel University
joint winner of last year's Booker Prize
for her novel girl woman other Bernardin
Everest a good evening welcome of course
to my guests here in the studio to
Vaughan gething joining us down the line
and of course to our audience virtual
audience thank you very much for being
here you are joining us from Cardiff and
the Cardiff area it's very lovely to
have you with us and of course if you
want to join the conversation you can
contact the program at BBC question time
on social media and be part of the
conversation so let's start with our
first question tonight from our virtual
audience
Tessa Marshall okay so in the wake of
the black lives matter protest well the
panel commits to educating the citizens
of the UK about the atrocities of the
British Empire take down the statues and
the bullet rates that represent slave
traders in the UK and people who profit
from Empire really and will you
apologize for paying off the owners of
slaves and I thought that the British
people were paying off until as late as
2015 Robert well I think we got to
confront our history warts and all and
whilst there are many things we can be
proud about with regard to Britain and
its history there are there's a lot that
we need to confront and be honest about
that is bad about our history but I
think that applying
today's standards to what may have
happened many hundreds
years ago is a difficult concept to say
the least and I think rather than using
the language of blame and apology we
should be being honest about it
being forthright about it using
democratic processes wherever possible
to deal with it so let's take for
example particular statues to slave
traders that might be in Bristol or
elsewhere use the democratic process to
through a proper decision decide what to
do with that particular memorial or
statue tear it down then I think they
were I think that whilst I absolutely
get and understand this huge strength of
feeling that's been engendered as a
result of that appalling incident in
Minneapolis and the fact that many
people have just had enough and I get
that utterly I do think that we all owe
it to each other to respect the rule of
law and to within that work for greater
equality and I think the scenes that we
saw in Bristol were disturbing in the
sense that there didn't seem to be that
sense of order I mean yours your justice
sector do you want to see those people
prosecute well I think an investigation
is ongoing and we've gotta let the
police do their job independently and
let the prosecuting authorities follow
the evidence where it leads but the
point I'm making is that if we stand for
something together and collectively in
this great country it's got to be the
rule of law and those values of freedom
that attracted so many people here in
the first place and make this country
whilst it is imperfect and whilst
there's a huge amount for us to do a
good place to live because we have that
underpinning of the rule of law and
democracy let's celebrate that but let's
be honest and confront the past as well
and let me just Tessa when you said that
the you want the government to apologize
for reparations paid to countries until
2015 for slavery what are you referring
to so yeah so the - that was and that we
were paying off refers to the 20 million
and pounds that was paid off to slave
owners and when slavery became illegal
in 1837
and so that that is something that the
British government was paying off until
as late as 2015 Robert look I think the
history of our islands is always with us
I think actually the lady is right
because I've read reports similarly
about that but he's I think she makes a
very powerful point about the fact that
you cannot escape history and I think it
would be fundamentally dishonest of us
to through removing statues and
airbrushing out history to then pretend
that all was well you know totalitarian
regimes do that and communist regimes
and other extreme regimes do that sort
of thing and then pretend that all is
well no we need to be honest face up to
it and accept the fact we are as much
prisoners of our history as it as
anything else but we have a chance to
democracy to break free and progress yes
I I totally disagree with you actually
because I absolutely relished that
statue being toppled you know in Bristol
they had tried for decades to either get
the statue removed or to get a plaque
put on the statue to provide the context
for Colston's
you know history as a slave trader and
we mean I think everybody now knows that
he was culpable in terms of some 80,000
Africans being enslaved in the New World
and 20,000 of those Africans were also
lost at sea so I think he's he's a
really was a really toxic symbol in
Bristol and it was really important that
he should go or at least be
contextualized and people tried to do
that and they tried for decades they
didn't get anywhere with it so it felt
to me that it was totally right that
they should topple that statue because
of what he represented and I'm totally
for a lot of the other statues in this
country being removed and perhaps
recontextualized in museums or somewhere
where we actually understand what role
they played in society in a wider sense
and that the whole idea about which kind
of statues for example so there was
somebody removed from
outside the Museum of London for example
Robert Milligan Nelson you know who is
such a sort of totemic figure literally
in this country and would you want to
see his his statue come on well I think
we need to happen a sensation probably
but that there is also this argument
that's come up in terms of the statues
that we can't change history and that it
is the history of this country but
actually history is a construction
ok events happen we have a past and then
historians contextualize that past and
interrogate it and what's happened in
this country is that you know it
historically that has been done by white
an elite white men who have been the
historians who have set the framework
for the events of the past so history is
something that needs to be challenged
and Riaan interrogated and revised
constantly and removing those statues is
the certain innocence it's giving power
to the people who really do object to a
symbol of their historical slavery and
all their allies as well the other thing
about history is that history has always
excluded
primarily women and people of color and
working class people and lgbtq+ people
in the ways in which it's been told and
that also goes to what you were saying
about the colonial history you know a
lot of people in this country don't
understand the colonial history or they
understand it through a certain prism
where they they they feel that Britain
went and traveled all over the world in
order to help people you know there is
still a section of society who don't
think slavery was a really bad thing so
I think it's really important there we
interrogate history and when you have to
take the law into your own hands and
remove a statue I mean God nobody died
you know it's just this little tin
statue or whatever it was that was
thrown into the river and it then led to
this conversation that we're having now
about the rest of the relics of
Britain's murky past that I think it's
really important and when Teta talks
about removing statues or portative
of anyone who has profited from empire
well wandering I mean that's weird
that's weird Israel
yes but I think I've is the visual
symbols the statues are really toxic and
they really are an effort in the front
to our shared humanity and I think I
think at least we need to look at that
and and you know Britain was built on
the on the wealth of slavery and
colonialism that's the truth and we
don't really admit that rocket well
there's a quote of Nelson Mandela says
hiding our history is not the route to
enlightenment we have to understand our
history and we have to confront it and I
had really much we bought Robert
Buckland I was saying that we can't
charge the past by the values of today
and it seems that people are trying to
use the evil of slavery to rewrite the
history of this culture and and and and
try and negate the heritage of this
country this country has do you think
you think it was wrong to take down the
statue I think it's wrong to take it
down in that in that way and I think any
vandalism of any kind is completely
unacceptable
it's a it's against the law and it's as
graceful that the police would they're
not in there in sufficient numbers to to
prevent that and prevent that happening
I mean people have made comparisons the
worst the worst aspect for me of the of
the of the London demonstration seeing
police running away from demonstrators
in fear that's a breakdown of your Lord
it's more blue and it's completely
unacceptable
and when you talk about vandalism for
example I mean one one example that's
been quoted is and I'm not equating the
two but the Berlin wall for example
which obviously people just pull down
themselves and the police stood by and
just let it happen I'm not I'm not
trying to say the two are the same but
nonetheless nonetheless it was no but
the argument that is made is liddie
it was it was it was something that
people
statues of long-forgotten people at a
time when the country sleepwalking to
economic disaster and our children have
been prevented from going to school
well we may well come to it will do with
one one thing in a time it's
mind-boggling okay well let's talk to
some of our virtual orders got their
hands up sin I think it's important that
a society we look at the past and we
don't need to glorify or celebrate the
events of the past that we as a nation
took part in I agree that statues that
have links to the past that they're
issues relating to slavery do you need
to be taken down I'm not asking them to
be hidden I think they need to be in a
museum
because museums are great places to
educate and help remember the past and
maybe even have history about which is
clonal ism or minority communities in
the curriculum I think that would be an
important step that we could take as a
sighted Theon so I'm just gonna say I
agree completely we got bid seeing that
every society about and the fact that
embrace I went to university embrace on
three years you know it has been a topic
of discussion and to take it down and
you know the voice is the whole
Democratic thing that we're saying it's
what people have been asked and sig that
don't know people have been ignoring it
so in the same way somebody's been
saying well no actually need to say up
there so who were they trying to protect
they're they're trying to protect the
name of you know they're trying to show
that this actually should say and you
say that it's disturbing away it was
taken down if you think about the people
that it's affected or the ancestors the
people that walk past that every day
would not be disturbing to see someone
glorified when they have killed
thousands of people and of being sort of
celebrating away so publicly so I just
don't agree exactly what Rocco or what
they're just so secretary had to say
there it's disturbing or in some way
it's any way worse than going to the
Democratic way when they're still people
trying to justify what that man did
Elaine hi I I like the idea of Justice
and part of the question because there
will be equal measures on both sides I'm
really interested in how we all all come
together and have a critical
conversation about how we can go forward
with this issue well let me come to to
John Williams on that John you you you
wanted to take this question forward yes
so will the possible taking down the 60
statues in the UK advance the cause of
black lives matter
so thorn I mean this just leads on
really from Tesla's question whether or
not taking the statues down is is
productive and whether you approved of
what happened in Bristol and and is it
perhaps obscuring a larger or helping a
larger discussion well I'm pleased that
John's made his point in its question
because what I was doing to say to the
original question monster yes I do think
some of those statues need to come to
help and others that stay up I think
need greater context about who those
figures were but the black lives matter
campaign is not a campaign to to
re-engineer our public space and remove
statues it's actually not even about the
death of George Ford it's about the
persistent and continuing racial
inequalities that are threatened the
published America but other countries
around the world including our own and
that's the point and I think within that
this is only one small part of the
debate we need to have as a group of
countries but then also the action that
we need to take and all of us are
painfully familiar with the fact that
criminal justice outcomes are different
if you look like to me compared to
Robert they're different in terms of
what how consumed in terms of mental
health services - that's a sort of an
action that I think we need to see taken
and not to let down a blind alley here
and in doing that it's not just
examining our distant past or you know
trying to rewrite our histories
understanding - to help build our future
under the way politician has talked
about this matters so I think the Prime
Minister would be in a better position
to me his job if he recognized that
start of the 21st century
talking about watermelon smiles and
pickaninnies was not helpful it was an
LPO type we're saying for the leader
plug comes some of the offensive
comments he's made in the recent past -
we can all learn from this and take the
opportunity this extraordinary global
movement to reset not just our view on
our past but much more important to make
changes to our shared future and lives
off so you'll want to respond to what
Warner said but also just looking at
John and Tesla's questions there so in a
sense two sides of the same coin
you should we be taking statues down
port removed portraits commemorating
people who had profited from slavery or
property from the Empire Tess is saying
or should we be is that incense
counterproductive tens of looking at the
bigger issue I think certainly this is a
time where I look back to my time and I
was raised in Eltham and the the
terrible appalling murder of Stephen
Lawrence and at that time it drove many
establishment changes but it evidently
did not drive enough we know that we
know that we live in a racist society
now there's one thing that I just could
refer back to what Vaughn said and this
is a little bit disappointing because
frankly Vaughn I think we are trying to
fight from the same corner here and you
do know that Pleiku murray of course
adam price was called for a an inquiry
into structural racism in wales it was
in response to his questioning that the
first Minister of Wales responded with
the with with with the concept
supporting the concept of a black and
minority ethnic Museum in Wales and also
it's been played Kamri who's been
leading on perhaps the major point which
is changes to the curriculum but what
Vaughn's devotees is is also see Adams
apologised for comparing Wales to a kind
of colonial outpost yep when we're
looking at the real big issues of
politics one of them rather petty things
that we do in politics in the United
Kingdom is bring it down to
personalities and these are big serious
it mentions now looking at the statues
and I raised this yesterday with the
prime minister of course what we have
within the United Kingdom is the way of
presenting history very much through the
eyes of the Conservatives and the Prime
Minister when I asked him on this
question
is that conservatives don't pull down
statues conservatives don't pull down
statues
it was the imagery of the past and yet
and I know that the Lord Chancellor will
agree with this we have much legislation
in place to deal with with with racial
hatred but we know that we still live
with inner racial a society which which
acts upon rationalism so and racism so
the question that I have for us now is
how are we going to bring about the big
social changes the big changes and
attitudes that's why the statues are so
interesting because they are so symbolic
of a certain sort of history that said
the Empire was fine that the British
Empire was a force for good and a force
for good only in the world this is not
true and now is the time to come to
recognize that it isn't just the history
of powerful and white men who often made
their money and their fortunes out of
the sufferings of others now is the time
for the voice of the others to come
through and that is my hope for the
future but the despot that we're having
this discussion here it has to go beyond
the usual talking heads of politicians
and get into our curriculum and really
change people's attitudes okay tie up
slavery has bred racism as a person
responsible in a responsible position I
can't even bring myself to repeat what
some politicians including our prime
minister has said in the past about
minorities
I've been reading history at a s level
revising with my son who didn't do his
proper example I was read about to peel
the curriculum needs to change the war
of independence is depicted as the
Indian Mutiny
that needs to change especially children
who are born and bred over here my son
considers himself as Welsh and for him
to read history in a different manner
than what I have read and what I read
recently I think it's important that
violence should be condemned but racism
from talk diamond needs to be dealt with
I'm very proud to live in Cardiff and
work in
Riccardi for last 25 years it's a
multicultural society but we need to
make sure that from town top-down from
Boris downwards we need to deal with
this racism no but what I mean we heard
the Prime Minister talk about this it
promises questions yesterday he the
comment he made about picking and he's
picking and he's waving at the Queen and
water mother science has come back time
and time began to haunt him what what
what are we gonna see from the
government if anything you know Prime
Minister who was mayor of probably the
most cosmopolitan city in the world and
was elected twice and whose approach to
issues of migration and multiculturalism
has been open liberal and inclusive and
his remarks in the aftermath of the
unlawful killing of George Floyd I think
were appropriate they struck the right
tone and he talked in a positive way
about what needed to be done so I think
absolutely we have the right approach I
think that sense of trying to bring
people together is what we need now and
I think a lot of the remarks I think are
on the money when it comes to the fact
that rather than focusing upon icons and
statues actions speak far louder than
words and Vaughn has made the point
about the criminal justice system I have
responsibility for that in England and
Wales I absolutely take responsibility
for the need to improve the way in which
we deal with black minority ethnic
people in that system and there's a
whole range of things that we are doing
no time to go into them now but the sort
of practical measures that we've got to
do to make the experience please the
black population in Wales is over
represented by five times within the
prison population of Wales surely that
is a desperate failure that is an
indication of the racism of our society
in action would you as the Secretary of
State for justice commit to you
that as a target to reduce that
percentage that unacceptable percentage
within the prison population
specifically in Wales of course it
applies throughout England and Wales
entirely well what I commit to Liz is
making sure that the problems that are
inherited by the criminal justice system
are dealt with further up the line and
the diversions that are needed in order
to help people are of that background
not to get into the system in the first
place or what we're going to have to do
and that's not just me that's education
as health that's housing that's the
whole apparatus of government in Wales
and in Westminster actually coming
together round the problem and the
individual rather than this silo
approach that means that I end up being
responsible for a system with a
disproportionate number of young people
from that background within it refusal
to engage in the reality the Prime
Minister said something deeply offensive
the start of the 21st century it is a
real issue but people that look like me
having a prime minister to use the
language of watermelons files and
picketing it matters just as someone
comparing the experience of Wales to
colonialism in the african-american
experience it matters and it's offensive
and if we want to move on go to accept
that isn't acceptable and you gave
credit for yourselves and your parties
and actually the heaving that I want to
see taking but they stride across United
them if you only acknowledge what is
staring you in the face because I think
just the fact that I'm a politician I'm
this colour every day of the week every
single day of the year and it matters to
me but we are spoken about and treated
in a way that reflects who we are and
not the color of our skin so use
language that matters and make sure
you're not making these meaning after
poverty's for things that are plainly
wrong I think that you know I find Boris
I found Boris offensive all along with
his journalism in the spectator with the
racist things that he said when he
became mayor of London yes he became
mayor of a of an incredibly
multicultural City but one of the first
things he tried to do was to get rid of
Black History Month right so we're
talking here about the importance of
history and acknowledging the past
also we should be celebrating that the
entire population people of color and
our contribution to this society we've
been here since the Romans that
something I've written about and we have
a mayor who tries to get rid of the the
single thing that we do to bring to the
wider public the fact that we have a
history and in fact the truth is of
course black history is British history
this is a multicultural country and
always has been and British history is
world history because we had an empire
that that ruled over a quarter of the
world for a very long time so I really
don't accept you apologizing or trying
to you know to present Boris Johnson in
a good light because I found him deeply
offensive Robert Creed's you on respond
I'm gonna move on and moved you and
respond to that this is the Prime
Minister after all knows as a lead of
your plastic I would say that
journalists write lots of things and
write lots of polemic and lots of things
that they would like to not come to
regret not choose to do you know I would
say this that never said that he
regretted using those to look I can't
speak for him about what might have been
written 15 or so years ago I've got to
judge the person on his actions as an
elected politician and what I've seen is
somebody who absolutely understands the
challenges we face accepts them faces up
to them and wants to do something about
them
[Music]
you